the Hamas terror attack on Israel is the
largest mass murder of Jews since the
Holocaust says Israel's president what
he called his country's Darkest Hour has
cast a long Shadow worldwide The Assault
on October 7th is prompt in comparisons
to massacres perpetrated by the
terrorist group Isis Hamas Fighters
killed more than a thousand Israelis
including babies children old people
They seized an unprecedented number of
hostages so far at least a thousand
Palestinians have died during
counterattacks by the Israeli Army which
has blocked the Gaza Strip and mobilized
a record 300,000 reservists why were
Israel's vaunted military and
intelligence Services caught off guard
what will the attack mean for an already
precarious region our topic today Hamas
Terror against Israel how will it change
the Middle
East
[Music]
and welcome to to the point it's a
pleasure to introduce our guests
starting with gido steinber who is a
terrorism expert at the German Institute
for international and security Affairs s
swp it's also a pleasure to welcome
Daniel Dyan Burma he is a senior news
editor on the Foreign Affairs desk at
the German daily devent shanni rosanis
is a colleague here at DW she's a
commentator and editor for us and has
also worked for media in her home
country Israel and it's a pleasure to
welcome joining us virtually OFA vman he
is an independent author and a musician
who's equally at home and in Germany and
in Israel and he joins us via Skype and
ofer if I if I may I'd like to start
with you you are in Israel at the moment
tell us how people are reacting to this
worst attack in 50 years Israel had been
been Riven by divisions in recent months
is that now has that
receded well the people are more
preoccupied with uh overcoming the every
daily uh challenges we have to help
those who have been evacuated from Gaza
those who are being evacuated now from
the northern borders I would say the
larger questions like the question of um
social Unity about politics these are
questions that we'll have to wait until
the the war is over thank you and and
shaie one of the Striking things the
images that we've been seeing images of
terrified young concert goers of blood
smeared homes in villages very close to
the border is the fact that people seem
to have felt so safe there so close to
Gaza it seems that that very high-tech
very expensive wall was viewed as an
impenetrable barrier correct that was
one of Israel's uh pillars of Defense
when it was looking into that region the
Assumption was first that there will be
head notice in the sense of intelligence
and that this uh barrier which was as
you said very expensive and very
technologically advanced will secure the
border and the failure of these two is
still something that isra so many
Israelis are grappling with still and
it's going to stay there for a long time
try to figure this out we're and we will
come back to that uh question shortly
but G let me ask you about the
comparisons that we're hearing more and
more now between Hamas and and the the
incredible suffering that it wreaked in
uh its attack and Isis are those
comparisons Justified and what do they
tell us well both organizations come
from totally different ideological
backgrounds and uh until recently I
would always have argued that Hamas is a
lot more pragmatic in the Muslim
Brotherhood tradition uh than Isis was
but if we take a look at the violence
that has been perpetrated over there uh
it uh primarily reminds me uh of of the
yazidi genocide in Iraq and this uh this
quest for an an anihilation not only of
Israelis but of Jews is is I think
something new and that's quite
comparable uh to Isis so I think when
dealing with the organization uh we
should perhaps not think as much of of
Hamas of former times but rather of
fighting an organization that is a lot
closer to Isis than we previously
thought Daniel what will have been the
driver for Hamas to perpetrate this
attack now at this moment in time what
do we know about Hamas aims here well
there is some speculation over that one
of the most plausible explanations is
that the sponsors of Hamas were
interested in stopping the RMA between
Israel and Saudi Arabia which would have
been uh really a serious blow to Iranian
strategy in the region um but I think we
can't take this completely for granted
at least the United States say uh they
have no indication that Iran directly
ordered this attack but we can be sure
it couldn't have happened without
Iranian approval and as for Hamas they
always have an interest in dealing fatal
blows to Israel also Melinda just I can
quickly add to that we know this was in
the making for many months over a year
already and the Saudi American ties that
have been exposed this just happened
recently so there's something deeper
there connecting more to what uh guu was
saying about where Hamas is get heading
ideologically what we're seeing as as
the hatred running deep and and how it
channels the actions of this
organization and over all of this is
taking place in a region that was
already a Tinder Box what potential
reverberations worry you the
most well honestly speaking as I'm
talking to you from the northern part of
Israel next
to as I was driving around my hometown
here uh in Northern Israel seeing all
the tanks seeing all the military we are
looking towards north to the lebanes
Border we ask ourselves how will the
hisbah react how will Iran react it is I
must admit as an Israeli again living
now being in Northern Israel very
reassuring to see the strong us American
response sending a a carrier here to the
region to send the message don't as
President Biden said don't back off and
US foreign minister also uh traveling to
uh the region as well let's take a
closer look at the hamus attack and its
potential reverberations in the
region Hamas and islamist terrorist
group fired more than 2,000 rockets at
Israel on October 7th
alone it broke through the barrier
around the Gaza Strip using explosives
and
bulldozers according to Israeli reports
some 1500 militants breached the Israeli
military block of Gaza into Israeli
territory and killed more than 1200
people on the street and in their homes
including young people attending a music
festival about 150 people including
women and children have been taken
hostage the Iranian head of state
Ayatollah Kam praised the attack while
rejecting accusations that it had been
orchestrated by the mul regime but some
analysts say that a large scale attack
of this nature would have not been
possible without support from
tyan Iran has repeatedly threatened to
destroy its perceived Archen enemy
Israel for years the regime has aided
the militant islamist group Hamas
providing money weapons and training
Iran has also threatened Israel with the
help of Hezbollah its Ally militia in
Lebanon widely considered a terrorist
organization Hezbollah immediately
expressed solidarity with Hamas by
firing rockets at the Israeli
border can Israel defeat Hamas by
military
means G I'd like to put that uh question
to you but coupled uh with uh some of
the language that Israeli leaders are
using they're talking about eliminating
uh Hamas when they describe their
intentions Gaza is a dense urban area
Hamas Fighters are surrounded by civili
so what does a campaign of elimination
look like well we don't know exactly uh
what what the Israeli War plan will be
uh but according to what what leaders
say we we will have to expect a ground
offensive through the whole Gaza Strip
uh and I think that the Israeli military
uh is is capable um of uh of destroying
the structures of of Hamas in the G Gaza
Strip many uh Hamas Fighters will die
perhaps most of them many Israeli
soldiers will die and many civilians
will die uh no matter um how careful the
Israeli military proceeds um I don't
think there is there is any alternative
if if the government if the Israeli
government really wants wants to go um
through all the all the gazen cities
Daniel the eu's foreign policy Chief and
a number of other leaders as well have
warned that Israel as it embarks on a
military campaign must respect
international law avoid harming
civilians is that wishful
thinking it will be hard to do that but
if you take international law quite
literally international law does
recognize the fact that civilian
casualties happen in Wars international
law says that Waring parties need to
take every measure they can in order to
protect civilians but what is sure is
that we will see a lot of Civilian
casualties and we will also see media
and policy campaigning from um the uh
Hamas side and also in many Arab states
that will accuse Israel of needlessly
slaughtering Palestinians this will be
part of the political fight around this
conflict you recently wrote that making
peace with Hamas is impossible out of
the question so I know it's early days
but what does that mean how does this
end well I think making peace with Hamas
is um at least close to Impossible
because of its fundament fundamentalist
religious ideology and also because it's
not up to Hamas alone to make peace it
is also an instrument of Iranian foreign
policy I think if we want to settle the
conflict around Hamas uh for good then
it would need a grand settlement in the
Middle East that would um somehow at
least limit the confrontation with Iran
from Israel but also from many Arab
states this is part of the context at
least for Iran and we'll come back to
that point but shanni let me ask you
about the hostage situation Hamas has
some 150 Israeli hostages including old
and young people children mothers it has
threatened to murder them them if Israel
attacks in the Gaza Strip
indiscriminately without warning do you
think that will deter the Israeli
authorities well officially they say it
won't um all the statements we've been
hearing from Israeli officials is that
they're going to fight Hamas as if there
are no hostages only maybe in specific
cases when they know on of specific uh
place where they're being held they
might it might deter them um it's a it's
a it's a terrible position that that it
puts the Israeli leadership in um you
cannot uh there they don't control Gaza
they don't know what's happening in the
underground level of the tunnels in Gaza
and where these people are hidden
they're not even sure how many of them
are there held by Hamas and Hamas is
very purposely hiding that uh to use
that um I wouldn't put it past them to
use the hostil in any way possible uh
and uh Israel is uh always it's always a
touchy subject in Israel and this time
specifically um the greater the outcry
from the public will be the harder it
will be for the Israel leadership to
take uh to ignore this topic of for in
the past Israel has participated in
hostage exchanges in fact the current
head of Hamas in Gaza was a member of a
mass group that was swapped for one
Israeli prisoner namely uh gilad Shalit
U do you think any kind of negotiations
would be going on now is there any way
to try to effect such a swap at this
time well there are attempted
negotiations via Qatar via Egypt
actually as one reads uh via Germany as
well we have a different dimension now
as you have rightly mentioned gilad
Shalit was one person who was exchanged
to around 1,000 uh Palestinian prisoners
in Israel we have now around
150 uh Israeli um prisoners or Israeli
victim sitting in the um in the Gaza
Street young babies all
old people and I must say it is a
challenge talking as a journalist it is
a challenge to talk about the things to
talk about the human sufferings of these
people actually to also talk about the
human suffering of the Civil population
in Gaza in a in a remote manner maybe
because I see in Israel uh it is rather
rather difficult and I ask myself in
order to avoid from the destruction that
awaits now the Gaza Strip from an
Israeli offensive I think that it is the
role maybe of the Arabic world it is
defin definely role of the Palestinian
diaspora to sound a clear voice that
whatever Hamas has done um made it
actually is not a thing that has been
done on behalf of the Palestinian people
it is not a thing that has been done for
the Palestinian struggle for for
Independence and that might be give a
perspective that might give a a way to
relieve Gaza and relieve Israel from
Hamas and avoid civilian casualties on
both sides as much as possible are you
hearing voices like that for example
from members of f
which is usually viewed as the moderate
uh Palestinian uh
representative there are two answers to
this question the Arabic silence
especially the Silence of uh the
Palestinian autonomy autonomy and the
The Silence of the Palestinian diaspora
is painful in our years especially those
of us who have been struggling side
alongside with the Palestinians for
Palestinian statehood but within Israel
we see in row of Jewish Arabic NOS we
see voices we hear voices of
solidarity um regarding these these
attacks we see voices we hear voices who
say this has nothing to do with the
Palestinian struggle this has nothing to
do with the with Islam but again the
Silence of the Palestinian diaspora The
Silence of the Palestinian Authority is
painful we also need to keep in mind
Melissa there's there's Muslim victims
among the Israelis um and still being
bombarded uh there are many uh Muslim
Arab Israelis sharing Destiny in faith
with Israelis shoulder-to-shoulder yeah
uh gido those Palestinian civilians in
Gaza Israel has called on them to leave
uh undoubtedly as it's considering uh a
grand offensive but where are they
supposed to go Egypt for one has refused
to set up safe corridors for refugees to
leave the Gaza Strip well the there is
an area in the Gaza Strip where they
could possibly go in the southeast East
and I think that there that the Israeli
military would would be ready to respect
uh the safety of of any persons in in
the area but quite in general there
simply won't be enough space for gazans
gazin to leave if Egypt does not let
them enter the country and it seems as
if Egypt will not do
that again if if Israel attacks no
matter whether they there are
humanitarian corridors inside or outside
of Gaza many civilians will die Daniel
can you um say a word about uh again how
you see the further progression in Gaza
let's say Israel does conduct this
campaign to eliminate Hamas what does it
have to do after that reoccupy Gaza it
has been profoundly reluctant to do so
it left more than 20 years ago and has
has attempted to contain rather than to
occupy will that change well I think it
might change and actually when you talk
to members of the Israeli military and
to some politicians um behind closed
doors they would tell you that maybe it
was really a mistake to move out of Gaza
in 2005 and that it has been evident
that you can't control this place from
the outside that you can't prevent it
from uh becoming a time bomb that
explodes in regular intervals so I think
this is definitely not out of the
question but I think we also have to
keep in mind that there are also
problems brewing in the West Bank and
this could be another problem that
Israel has to deal with either
politically or security wise maybe even
within the course of this conflict let
me ask um I'm going to switch focus a
bit and come back to how this could have
happened and uh Shany if I look at the
headlines in Israel
I see headlines like uh netanyahu's
recklessness has brought War upon Israel
that's a quote from haret the left
leaning Israeli newspaper despite the
mood of national Unity or at least
solidarity would you say that this is uh
provoking criticism and is the debacle
as much a political one as a military
one well I everybody feels something is
off right left strong supporter of n now
everybody understand this is an
unprecedented failure this is an
unprecedented shock and Trauma um there
are attempts mostly from above from
politicians to put politics aside but
the rage is such that these voices
cannot be tained for too long um there
is no doubt Netanyahu has been the Prime
Minister for over I mean for 16 years
almost uh other than a short interval
last year um he has appointed many of
the heads of the security and defense
apparatus he is convin been campaigning
to be Mr defense this is claimed for
fame and failing in this point is going
to be something that's going to be very
hard for him to dodge so I think also if
we want to stay away from cynical look
into politics this is the role of
leadership taking responsibility the
Israeli people many of them feel they
have been left without anyone taking
responsibility defend for themselves
during that attacked and and in the days
that they are still following with a
great need that is there and very little
response from the government
um so we it has to go hand in hand we
have to see it together G you us leaders
are saying that Egypt actually warned uh
Israel about three days before the
attack that something like this might be
coming and it seems that Hamas in part
through disinformation managed to lull
the Israeli Security Services into uh a
false sense of security so how was that
possible and what does it tell us about
a vaunted military and intelligence uh
power look uh I'm I'm not that sure that
the intell intelligence failure is as
big as it is being depicted right now
simply because Hamas is a very
professional very secretive highly
highly ideological organization it is
capable of hiding some things especially
because uh the Israelis were expecting a
similar attack not from the Gaza Strip
but from the north for four months
already so I'm not that sure that and
you always have to expect that your
intelligence Services don't get prior
information about operations they are
not perfect it's a very very hard job
they have been extremely successful for
decades but things like that happen and
that is why uh on such a border you need
the military but the military wasn't
there theoretically it should be one
division let's say about 20 uh 25,000 uh
20,000 soldiers they were not there so
that's the failure of the military
leadership and of the political
leadership and I agree some months after
after this war has ended I believe
Netanyahu and some others will have to
leave well Netanyahu has now gone into a
uh Unity government with the Centrist
opposition uh leader Benny gun who has a
great deal of military experience but
the extreme rightwing members of
netanyahu's Coalition remain in the
government as I understand it so what if
anything will
change I would allow me please to
rephrase your question a little bit
netan was forced into a government of
national Unity um we we had to wait for
five days for this government of
national Unity to be formed we had to
wait we had to wait for seven eight nine
hours between before netan who is
actually usually he jumps in front of
every camera before he talked to the
Israeli people explaining what is going
on actually the only Act of political
leadership that we have seen in Israel
in the past few days came from US
President Joe Biden it did not come from
the Israeli leadership and if to follow
up on what G Steinberg just said the
military was not there where was it the
question is where was it I know these
are questions that will be discussed
after the war is over but we know that
uh the Israeli military and this you
know reflects upon your question about
the right-wing the right extremist in
the Israeli government has created many
provocations in the West Bank through
the settler movement and the Israeli
Army was forced to take care of those
provocations so we ask ourselves where
was the military what is the role of the
political uh of the political leadership
in Israel in allowing this horrible
attack to to happen and I'm I'm sorry to
say I hope that g steinber is right and
that Nat will not survive this war this
bloodiest day for the Jewish people
since 1945 but um the Israeli the
Israeli politics is since 10 11 months
anything else but rational so we will
have and we will have to wait and see
Danel I'd like to briefly yeah I the
failure is in in is is in the macro
we're not into the details of what
happened to the intelligence the failure
is the shortsightedness the failure is
the arrogance the failure is the lack of
prospect um that Netanyahu is not you
know has given or not given uh to the
region to the Palestinian for many years
this is where the failure is let me come
back to another dimension that was
covered briefly in our report that we
saw earlier and that is Iran's ongoing
support for Hamas and for hisbah Daniel
you have uh called uh hisbah Iran's
sharpest sword so two quick questions if
I may what do we know about Iran's
involvement in the attack itself whether
there was explicit forn knowledge and
intentionality and secondly what do we
think about whether hisbah will jump
into the fry well as for Iran and its
involvement as I I've said it's
inconceivable that this would have
happened without Iran knowing and
approving it there have been reports
from Lebanon that there was a meeting uh
between Iranian Hamas and Hezbollah
leaders on Monday before the attack uh
this is not a confirmed report so we
should treat it with caution but it is
possible that Iran was uh closely
involved at least in an as an observer
in
that as for yeah you want to please no
um as for Hezbollah hisbah is uh mainly
so strong because it has a huge arsenal
of missiles uh not all of them are
really Advanced missiles although there
are some guided Precision missiles among
them but the sheer number of missiles
could um cause a huge problem for
Israeli missile defense which as we know
is probably the most advanced in the
world I don't think that Hezbollah wants
to ENT enter the fight at the moment
there's a tit fatat at the north but
this could escalate and it is already
escalating gido our title asks whether
this will change the Middle East could
we see this turn into a regional even an
international
configuration it's a plausible scenario
uh if hisbah intervenes if is hisbah
sees it sees itself forced into a
confrontation with Israel uh that is
that is a scenario and that's the very
reason why we have seen the movement of
the American aircraft carrier towards
the Eastern Mediterranean I hope that we
will see a relatively short war in Gaza
but I'm not that sure that uh um that
this will be will be the reality in the
coming weeks I'm afraid we'll have to
leave it there thank you very much to
all of you for being with us today
thanks to our viewers for tuning in see
you
[Music]
soon